Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
We have to mention that as well.
You, Federer, and Nadal. -Yes.
Three great giants.
Pushing each other forward, but...
Not only in Serbia
and not only your fans, but...
I think at the beginning, that relationship
was quite-I’d even say-quite toxic.
Not so much from Nadal's side,
but more from Federer’s and the media’s.
You mentioned that recently.
They simply didn’t want to
include you in that perfect story.
You were like an unwanted child,
like Yoko Ono in the Beatles. -Yes.
Did you feel that at the time?
-How could I not.
And did it frustrate you?
-Honestly, it did.
I can’t say it didn’t.
I’m a man with many flaws.
I’ve made a lot of mistakes,
but I’ve always tried
to live through the heart.
How should I say it, to be
honest and with good intentions.
The fact that someone is my biggest
rival and that I want to beat him,
doesn’t mean I wish him harm
in life or that I hate him.
Or, I don’t know, anything else.
Or that I would do something one way
or another so that he would lose
to me on the court.
On the court, we fight like knights,
one on one, and whoever wins wins.
There’s a lot to it. Some things
aren’t meant to be shared.
Things I’ve felt through
those rivalries, and experienced.
But that’s just how it is.
Those two already had
a rivalry before I came along.
Because Nadal had already
established himself years before me.
The two of them came from Switzerland
and Spain. From two Western powers.
As much as we want to see this world-
I don’t mean the tennis world-
I mean the world in general...
As democratic.
-As a place with equality.
As peaceful-but unfortunately,
racism and boundaries still exist.
And in that context...
I’m not referring here
to racism I experienced.
I’m talking about racism
as a phenomenon in society,
in politics, and in everything
that’s happening globally.
There are those affiliations and allegiances.
And I didn’t belong to that.
So, neither by nationality
nor by many other things.
By character, I was the young guy
who came in and said,
I’m going to be number one.
They didn’t like that
from the very beginning.
They didn’t like that I was there and
that now I was challenging those two.
And second, like I said,
okay, now I’m...
I respect and admire the two
of them, as I always have.
I’ve never said a bad word about
either of them, and I never will.
Because I have self-respect.
But I want to be better than them,
and I know I will be.
I have no problem saying that.
And I’ve always said it.
But you have to be politically correct
in their kind of atmosphere.
And then, first the media starts,
then someone else, then the sponsors...
Exactly. -And then the whole
machinery kicks in.
Powerful sponsors, corporations
behind the tournaments.
There are million things going on.
-Yes, this is...
You’re fighting Goliath
and trying to be liked.
And honestly, that’s why
I said it hurt me.
Because I tried to connect with people
on a human level, not just with them.
I simply noticed that it was a ruthless
competition and fight. A real war.
And I realized that, in a way,
I had to toughen up,
to shut myself off and go my own way.
But it's true I did try
to be liked by people a little.
Then I realized there’s no need
to pretend. Because that wasn’t me.
Trying to be what they wanted.
They wanted me to play to their tune.
I admit it, that’s how it was.
Because I felt, like you said, like
an unwanted child. That’s how it felt.
At that time, I kept thinking,
why is this happening?
What did I do... -What was your crime?
...to provoke this?
And it hurt me so much.
Okay, if they think...
Maybe they’ll accept me
if I behave differently.
So I... you know what I mean?
Then it backfired on me. -Yes.
Then I realized that a part
of the tennis and sports public
would never accept or love me
because of my attitudes,
behavior, and whatever else.
But I am who I am, and I sleep
peacefully. -That’s right.
Okay, later on, that relationship
between you changed.
I want to tell you...
My attitude toward them in
that sense never changed. -No.
The situation changed because
their attitude toward me changed.
I always tried to be,
how should I put it...
I looked up to them.
And I still look at them as people
who paved the way for me.
Especially Federer, who is
six years older than me. -Yes.
The moment I felt that coldness
and distance from him,
I said, alright, no problem.
And the moment they approached me,
I opened my arms and said, okay.
Now they’ve both retired, and with Nadal,
I always kind of understood him better.
We’re about the same age,
so maybe that’s why.
But the media later
also had to eat their words.
Because at the end of the day,
tennis is a measurable sport.
You can’t ignore something-
as the Italians say, carta canta.
That’s right.
-You can’t deny it.
Now, when you look, they’re no longer
on the court. They’re not competing.
From this perspective, how did you
view the three of you as players?
Where did you think you dominated?
What were you better at than them?
I don’t mean the surface
you played on.
And which territory didn’t you want to enter
because they were better at it than you?
For example, Nadal once said:
"With Roger, it was...
He always says Novak is
the best for him. Why?
With Roger, the tactic was clear.
Play to the backhand and wait for the chance.
But with Novak, I can’t play to
the backhand or the forehand.
I can’t play high balls.
I can’t even go for angles.
Because if it’s not a perfect shot,
it opens up a chance for him to score.
So I just have to play down the middle,
but at an insanely high level,
and wait for my chance."
Yes. -So where did you see yourself
in comparison to them?
I’m glad that Nadal saw and felt
it that way, because my goal was
and the people around me too
to create exactly that feeling in him,
and in every player I play against.
In the sense that I have enough
options in my game.
And that my game
is as complete as possible.
Meaning, that my game isn’t based
on the type of surface I'm playing on.
But that it’s all-round,
as the English say.
That my game can be applied to all
types of surfaces and in all conditions.
That took years to build.
Even when I won my first Grand Slam,
I still wasn’t playing that way.
It wasn’t until 2011
that I started playing like that.
That was the first time I had
one of the best seasons.
Only then did I reach
that level of play.
That’s when I truly felt
that no one could beat me.
Whatever happens, I always have a solution
no matter who I’m playing or how.
What I always tried to develop...
Again, I’ll go back to Jelena Genčić
and also Nikola Pilić.
I think they helped me a lot,
especially in developing
my ability to adapt.
To have my game, my base,
but also to be able to adjust tactically
depending on who is
on the other side of the net.
And how I need to
approach that match.
That’s one of the traits I’m very
proud of, and it’s helped me a lot.
Even in preserving energy,
no matter how exhausted I was, etc.
When we compare me,
Federer, and Nadal...
Federer is the most talented one,
the most beautiful to watch when playing,
he used his energy most efficiently.
He moved lightly, so elegantly,
and so efficiently.
While Nadal is the opposite extreme.
He dominated physically.
I was somewhere in between,
but I leaned more toward
Nadal’s style of play.
So, more sliding, more running,
baseline-focused play, and so on.
Each of us had our own characteristics,
and over time, as our rivalries
developed, they evolved
and strengthened.
We always say that, all three of us,
and I know they’ve said it too.
Through those rivalries, we each
contributed to one another’s growth
as tennis players, and as people.
Absolutely. -I say it without hesitation
my rivalry with those two had the biggest
influence on my development.
Especially in the second part
of my career, from 2011 onward.
I don’t even know which moments
I’d single out-for example, with Nadal-
when you walk out onto center
court at Roland Garros,
you don’t feel indifferent.
Everyone says that to you.
Perception plays a huge role-
I mean visual perception.
For example, if you’re playing
a tournament in Geneva, also on clay...
There, the side fences and
the back wall are fairly close.
Within regulation dimensions,
but minimal.
Whereas at Roland Garros, it feels like
you’re walking onto a football field.
There’s an extra 15 meters
behind the baseline,
and just as much to the left and right.
He played deep behind the baseline
and spun that topspin,
where the ball kicks up off the clay
and sends you back every time.
At that time, I felt like I just couldn’t
"break through", no matter what.
He would reach every ball.
And with his visual perception of the
court, that is so deep on the sides
and behind him, it made it
even harder for you to hit a winner
or do something because you felt
it was three times more difficult.
That's exactly how it was for me
in football. -Isn't it?
We went from West Ham's stadium,
that narrow English-style ground...
Yes, yes, the narrow one...
...to the Olympic Stadium in London,
which West Ham rented for 100 years.
And you're in the same position
as on that old pitch,
the field is the same size,
but you feel like there's no way
you can get to the penalty box in time,
even though it's actually the same.
Yes, it's the same. -Sorry to interrupt.
-No, absolutely. -It's the same!
Yes. That's a moment I would highlight
as something really significant.
It was a huge challenge for me.
I think I'm the only player who managed
to beat him 3 or 4 times on that court.
Or take Federer at Wimbledon,
for example.
I had more success against Federer
on the Wimbledon center court,
I think I lost to him once,
but I beat him four or five times.
Every time I played him on the center
court at Wimbledon, it was just...
You know when you have some matches,
or in your sport some games,
where you feel everything is vibrating.
Even before you step on the court,
in the locker room,
the whole day feels like
something special is happening,
like an out-of-body experience, from the
people, to the media, to everything...
Everything tingles, you know, because
you feel the uniqueness of the moment.
Especially since Federer and I played
3 Wimbledon finals against each other.
It's like, you know,
playing Federer at Wimbledon,
the most successful player ever,
on grass...
Wimbledon was always Federer's court.
-Yes, yes.
While Roland Garros was Nadal's court.
Because of Wimbledon being Federer's
and Roland Garros being Nadal's court,
I knew I wouldn't have the majority
of the crowd on my side in any match.
It was like that from start to finish,
until the very last point.
And that really got to me at first,
I couldn't overcome it because
I was fighting both against them
and against myself.
People say: "Novak needs to be provoked
to bring out the best in himself."
In some situations, at some moments
maybe that was true, and it did happen,
but it's not what I want.
Who wants to step out...
For example, imagine you step out
at the Bernabéu stadium
and 80,000 people boo you, and you have
to play every match in those conditions.
You understand me?
It's not that easy.
You have to get used to it,
and how you adapt to that
determines the outcome of everything.
-Yes, that's tough.
Tell me, now that they're not here,
has a part of you gone too?
Do you see parts of them in
Sinner or Alcaraz? It's not the same...
No, it's not the same. -It can't be...
-It's not the same.
Sinner and Alcaraz are truly
exceptional, outstanding players.
I'm sure we'll be seeing them
for many years to come
as the leaders of the sport, tennis. For
me, Federer and Nadal are irreplaceable,
and a large part of me left with them.
And as Federer left,
and as Nadal gradually stepped away,
not officially retired yet,
but even when he was still around,
I felt different than I do today,
after he's completely gone.
I really am different. I thought it
wouldn't be like that, but it is...
You know what I'm curious about?
Everything, of course...
As the English say,
'Heavy lies the crown'.
I told a few friends you were coming,
and they all told me to ask you this...
We understand the first Grand Slam,
the second, third, and fourth,
because you're the best player, because
you're talented. But how 24? How?
How is it possible to stay focused
in this sport to win it 24 times?
I'm an athlete, I know how
success can intoxicate you,
and how you want to repeat it
over and over again.
Take Luka Modrić's jersey,
and his words,
or Kukoč's about Jordan, about
building that dynasty, as they say.
It's easier somehow...
You can win the World Cup
as a footballer even if you played
an average tournament.
You can win the Champions League after
30% of your matches were poor,
or even an entire weak season,
but a teammate pulls you through,
the team pulls you through, you push
each other. But in tennis, you're alone,
and you constantly have to be
focused at that level.
How is that possible?
Explain that to us.
I think that question, especially in
today's world and the last 10-20 years,
when professional sports
like the global ones you mentioned
really demand that you be completely
professional off the court,
not just on the court. On the court,
it's what they call 'a must',
something you have to do,
something logical.
But what matters is
what you do off the court.
That's always been something
that buzzes in my ears.
From a young age, I was lucky, you
talked about luck, and I agree with you
that you need to be fortunate
first and foremost, to be surrounded by
the right people who will guide you,
show you, point things out,
and who will let you fall and learn,
who will enrich your life
but not make it easy.
Enrich in the sense of making you
stronger, more capable,
and more complete as a person
and as an athlete.
So, I think maybe the secret of success,
not just mine but of top-level athletes,
especially in individual sports is that
you find a formula that works for you.
In my case, because of the circumstances
of my upbringing and where I come from,
I was simply forced to adapt
my entire life to tennis.
When I say 'entire life'
I really mean the whole thing. So...
We talked about the teenage years you
mentioned, all those outings and so on,
I didn't have that,
not to mention alcohol...
Sure, I did drink and had a few nights
when I relaxed a bit, and that's normal.
You need to have a way to 'vent'.
-Of course.
But 95% of the time, what really matters
is how you spend your time.
How do you spend your time
in quarantine?
How do you spend it
during training periods?
Are you doing things that fill your
life, your mind, and your emotions
with good energy or not? I think
every athlete should ask themselves:
what do you do with your time?
Not just what you eat or drink,
but who you spend your time with,
those people around you who can be
family or friends... Family is family,
but who are the people you choose to
surround yourself with? What kind of
conversations do you have with them?
Become aware of that.
You know, for a long time,
I didn't understand the strength,
the power, and importance of realizing
that the topics I devote my vitality
and life energy to actually affect
my performance on the court tomorrow,
they absolutely do! All the news I read,
the topics I engage with, the people I
talk about, whether I mention politics
or something else, or whether I choose
to talk about something more positive...
Do you understand me? We're all human,
and it's difficult in these times...
I say many things are easier for
athletes in the last 15 years or so,
but mentally and emotionally, they're
much harder than they were for us.
I'm younger than you, but I was still
in that era without mobile phones...
Now social media is here,
and I catch myself losing hours on it,
and then I suddenly
snap back to reality and say,
'Man, where did my time go?
What did I do?'
100%, but where does your focus come
from to keep it going for so long?
Well, you practice it.
Slaven, you practice it, man.
It's like practicing a shot or a stroke.
Yes, but there's that paradox,
you obviously had dreams...
You know, nowadays everything is
explained with terms like
'comfort zone.' Don't stay in your
comfort zone because that's bad. -Yes.
And one of the reasons you do something,
not the only one, of course,
but alongside your dreams,
is to secure a comfortable life
for yourself and your loved ones.
And once you get that opportunity,
you run away from your comfort zone.
Under no circumstances
should you stay there
because that's a guarantee of failure.
-Yes. -How do you resist all of that...?
You know, I've talked generally about
being aware of the moment and your life.
In the sense of how consciously
you make decisions,
or how much someone else influences
your decisions, whoever it is.
Whether your friends call you out for
coffee, or maybe you can use that time
for something that's good for you,
even if it's just sleeping,
which is very useful. You don't have to
constantly sit and study or whatever,
but it's important to organize
your time and ask yourself:
If I can't set aside time
to do something for myself,
but I have to go somewhere else,
am I living the life I want to live,
in a way that makes sense
for my profession and career?
Or am I living just to belong to that
group, afraid of being rejected,
afraid they won't be my friends
tomorrow? That's one thing...
Now, when we talk about this here,
it might seem like a light topic
and maybe not that important,
but it is very important. -It is.
We're social beings. In sports,
especially individual sports,
we're often lonely. I sometimes say I
envy footballers and basketball players
for their amazing communities and
friendships. Thank God, I have that too,
not that I don't, but that's
the beauty of team sports.
But it can also drag you down if they
aren't willing to live in a way
you can and feel you should, but you
don't because, well, most don't.
And if most are like that,
then I'll be like that too.
Now it’s already a bit of psychology
and philosophy. This second thing
you asked me about, about how
to find new motivation if you’ve
already achieved something,
and how to keep going afterward.
Above all, for me, it’s love
and passion for the sport.
I love tennis because I love tennis.
I love holding the racket and playing.
That boy is still in me who
fell in love with tennis. I still feel it.
That connection. And secondly,
if I didn’t have the passion
and desire to compete, I wouldn’t
be playing professionally,
I’d just be doing it casually.
But I still feel that passion, it still
drives me crazy when someone beats me,
and I still want to outsmart someone
on the court and do whatever I can
with the racket in my hands
to win that match.
That still tells me the fire
in me is still there.
That flame is burning.
Of course, if you have a purpose,
which I think must come from emotion,
it must come from some depth.
Then after that, you ask yourself
if you have some clear visions,
meaning goals. Because goals matter.
Dreams matter. -That’s right.
-They drive you on a general level,
but short-term goals matter too.
They’re also important.
When we’re talking about weeks,
months, or years, you know-this season.
You have some clarity. You wake up
and say, OK, my goal is to get there.
Right now I’m here, starting point.
What can I do to get there
in the best possible way
within the time I want?
To be at my peak, to play at
the Grand Slams then and there,
to give myself the best chance
to become what I want to be.
Those are the things... it’s a process,
a mental one I feel I go through,
and it helps me be at peace
with some of my decisions.
And the part from the start
of the conversation,
maybe that’s a bit broader
and for another time.
You said that one time,
back in 2016. -Yes.
That from 2014 to 2016
you maybe played your best tennis.
You won six Grand Slams.
That’s epic, a rhapsody.
In 2016, you won Roland Garros
for the first time.
Back then you said you lost that
energy and motivation for a moment,
and you asked yourself: What now? -Yes.
-What happened, and how did you get it back?
Wimbledon, after winning Roland Garros.
Wimbledon came soon after,
a few weeks later. That’s both
the blessing and the curse of tennis.
You always have another big chance
very quickly, but precisely because
something big is coming right away,
it’s also a curse-
because you can’t really celebrate
what you just achieved.
I won a Grand Slam, I held all four.
People even told me:
"If you want to skip Wimbledon
and not play for the rest of the season,
that’s fine. You’ve already done
what you set out to do." But...
How can you not play Wimbledon?
-How do you skip Wimbledon?
That’s just... you always wonder
will there be another chance at Wimbledon?
These are the things constantly
circling in an athlete’s head.
I played the third round, Court 1.
Three rain delays.
I had a tricky opponent,
strong, fast serve, American.
Always tough on grass, and so on.
He won the first set, then two sets.
First delay was mid-second set.
My team came in while we waited.
In that little room nearby.
I talked to them, frustrated
with how I was playing, some stretching,
planning, we keep going.
I came back, won the third set.
I had momentum, started feeling
and playing better.
It was close in the fourth set,
on the edge of breaking through-
but I didn’t manage to.
And rain again.
Team came in, I said: "Guys,
please, let me be alone a little."
"Do you need anything?" "Nothing."
I need peace, I need to stare at the wall.
There was a TV there,
but I didn’t want anything.
At that moment, for the first time
in my life, I left my bags.
There wasn’t even a chair, just
a massage table. I didn’t lift the backrest,
just lay down like this.
Stared at the ceiling, at the wall.
For about 20 minutes,
half an hour. I didn’t move.
Muscles cool off, usually you stretch.
I didn’t want anything.
At that moment, I experienced
a kind of emptiness.
Then I lost the match
when I went back.
I simply felt like... now what?
I don’t know how to define it.
But again, like I explained before,
the moment of winning my first Slam,
then feeling for the first time
what it means to defend a title-
this was something new I unlocked,
something I never had before.
A new emotion, new feelings.
Now I wrote history, I’d achieved
pretty much everything there is to achieve-
and now what?
Then I basically had to go through
some internal transition.
To work on all of that
in order to come back again.
Maybe the whole process lasted
from late 2016 to mid-2018.
I played, got injured,
had that elbow injury
which made me rest for six months.
I had surgery, and so on.
Then I had trouble, my serve
changed because of the injury,
I dropped out of the top 20.
I wanted to quit tennis in 2018.
In March, I lost first round in Miami.
I said: I can’t, I need
to go somewhere.
Then I went with the family
to the Dominican Republic,
to a friend’s place.
There was a tennis court there.
They started playing.
After I don’t know how many days off,
I didn’t even want to come near,
didn’t want anything to do with tennis.
My wife was playing. I watched,
she was playing with our son.
I asked: "Can I?" She said: "No. Stefan
and I are playing now." -Wait your turn.
They finished, and then I stayed.
My son stayed a bit and played with me.
I told them to go, I’d stay alone.
I took the basket and barefoot, in trunks,
I started serving. One, two,
five serves-stayed two hours alone.
It slowly came back.
Then from 20-something in the world
back to number one by year’s end.
That was probably my biggest comeback ever.
Every phase has its why.
You just have to somehow-
that’s my life lesson-
give a chance to both life and God
to sort things out for you.
Sometimes it’s better to let go,
and then receive. -Yeah. Bravo.
You once said-earlier you said-
that curse of being first.
That feeling when you win a Grand Slam
for the first time, and then next time
you’re the target,
so to speak, that everyone wants.
You say tennis is a mental sport.
You say that in every single match
you go through
ups and downs, turbulence, frustration-
both mental and physical. -Yes.
You say those create fears
and doubts. In every match.
You simply have to get away from there,
think of something nice and escape.
You also say that the optimal state
in which every tennis player should be
is now. -Yes. -Not thinking about what
has happened or what will happen.
Well, life is like that too. Lennon said
that people spend their lives analyzing
the past and planning the future.
That's the same thing you just said.
But, how... OK, now you have the experience
and all. How did you reach that level
where you’re able to reset,
during a match,
where your pulse is 200,
adrenaline, everything?
To reset and ignore something
that happened 30 seconds ago.
Or a minute. -I always go back to one
interesting story of my friend.
He goes to a Buddhist Zen temple.
He is in France and his
spiritual teacher is in the French
mountains. He goes to visit him.
From time to time he spends days there.
He goes to isolate himself a bit,
to clear his mind and so on.
The first few times he went there,
he noticed how calm
that spiritual teacher is,
how nothing disturbs him,
how he doesn’t react to anything.
And not just there, but when they go
to the city, when they’re in crowds,
when he experiences some everyday things,
because they are also friends.
Then he asked him once
if he would tell him what it is
that you do and how is it possible
that you don’t react to anything, man.
That nothing really disturbs you.
People bump into your window in traffic,
they honk at you, want to break your glass,
and you’re like, nothing, it’s all good.
Calm, peaceful, serene.
How is it possible that you don’t have
those negative thoughts? He told him,
my friend, you’re wrong.
I do have those negative thoughts,
probably more than you do.
But the difference between you and me
is that I stay in them
less than a second. Then I return back.
That training I did - actually he did it,
gives me the benefits of being able
and allows me, gives me the tools,
to return instantly
to that kind of optimal state.
Calm state. And you stay in it.
Some people stay in it their whole life.
In some emotion of sadness,
anger, rage, whatever.
The reason I just told this
is because I like to go back to it
and to think about how life
is actually just a moment.
Life is here and now. The past
is something that already happened,
the future is yet to happen.
And Lennon was right.
People, all of us, including me,
constantly walk between the past
and the future. On the court,
that is even more noticeable.
I think about what maybe I could’ve
done in that previous point,
game, set. Or anxiety and fear arise from
the unpredictability of the next moment.
Whether it will go this way or that,
or the wind will blow this or that way.
Or, I don’t even know
what might happen.
I really tried, through my own life
and career experience,
to be as present as much
as I can here and now.
That’s a mindset I inherited
from Jelena and Niki,
and of course my parents
from the very beginning,
and from all the people I met,
worked with, and learned from.
All of that, in some way,
enabled and helped me
to shape myself,
my character and personality.
There are things I do,
conscious breathing, prayer,
visualizing the space...
Those are various techniques,
as I call them,
which don’t always help.
Life is more than that.
You can't just "live",
because everything is relative,
and upside down.
And then you get on the court
and you pray:
"Lord, help me, help me, help me."
That’s how it is.
So it’s very important to take
everything into account,
because everything matters.
What matters the most?
I don’t know - everything matters.
When you think about it...
It's important how you live,
how you sleep,
everything is absolutely important.
Because it all reflects on how you feel,
who you are as a person,
and then that either helps or
hinders you on your court. -True.
So, in that context,
I think it's something that,
if you're aware of it, and it helped me,
and I always say this,
50% of victory is achieved
before you step on the court.
At least 50%, at least.
Because if you define that prep,
mental, physical, emotional,
tactical, technical,
whatever angle you take,
it reflects afterward
on your perception of Wembley
or what you said about West Ham.
Will that consume you,
or will you say:
"Wait, this is really how it is,
but I’m going to adapt now.
Yes, it's a new situation,
something I haven’t prepared for,
but I’ll adapt quickly, whatever it is."
Like the art of war.
In that case, the war is won
before it even begins.
The proof is what you said,
those are your words.
Tennis is a mental sport,
everyone is ready,
everyone hits
forehand and backhand.
There are many players
who play phenomenally in training...
Now explain this stat to me...
I can’t process it,
so explain it to me, please.
I read it and it’s true, it’s a stat.
The percentage of points won,
albeit across a career,
at the beginning there were no wins,
yours, Nadal's, and Federer's
were at 54% and 55%. -Yes.
I’d have guessed 70%.
How is that possible?
It’s interesting.
In the end, when you draw
the line and look at it,
which that stat confirms,
what distinguishes elite
legendary champions from just
champions or excellent players,
and there are different categories,
as I say all the others and legends,
is simply that you win one
more point than your opponent.
You land one more shot,
make one better move,
it doesn’t have to be six,
one is enough.
But how, in what way,
that’s a broader story, long and wide,
but the essence is that you need to
work mostly on your weaknesses,
flaws and strengths,
not on how you’ll beat someone.
Of course you think about that,
you adjust your game to his flaws,
to him, or to a team,
but primarily it’s about you
as a tennis player, as a person,
who you are when you
step on the court.
Nadal and Federer have also
talked about it.
Nadal, several times.
He feels, when he steps on court,
and I’ve talked about it too,
that we’ve already won
more than half the matches
before even playing a point.
Because you see it
in your opponent’s eyes.
You see the way they walk,
how they step on the court
in front of 20,000 people
and how they handle it all.
What’s very frustrating
for most players
is when your whole résumé
and biography
starts getting read on court.
In tennis, that’s the culture.
At Wimbledon they don’t do it,
but at other big tournaments,
before you enter, they announce you.
And then on court,
they read everything you’ve won
and how many times.
And while they read that,
you feel the energy from the crowd...
It’s like in boxing:
"In the right corner is..."
...you feel the charge,
and just imagine
how it feels for your opponent
hearing all that.
He has to warm up,
but his hand is shaking.
That moment,
you must take advantage of it.
That’s something I had to
battle with for years.
I had to get used to them reading
all that about Federer and Nadal
when I played against them...
-Yes, you mentioned those two years.
Now, thank God,
the situation is reversed.
But those are the moments
I was talking about,
when everything matters.
It’s important to
understand the stadium.
To understand the wind direction.
To understand the smells.
To know where you’re sitting.
To know where your team is,
everything matters.
You can’t act like you fell from the sky.
"I fell from Mars, but I’ll manage."
There are some unforeseen situations
you have to adapt to,
but you have to be ready,
man, this is your job.
A man doesn’t come to an office,
to give a presentation,
and only then decide
what he’ll talk about.
You need some foundation,
your framework,
prepared with your team.
Someone comes in for
the presentation on screen,
then later you enter into
a spontaneous conversation.
But that’s how it goes.
Same in sports.
You prepare your tactics, technique,
tighten all the screws,
then you go out
and adjust to those things.
But in your head, you already have,
so to speak, in your notebook:
"I’m playing at Roland Garros,
if it’s a certain time,
the sun’s in this position..."
When I toss the ball, as we say,
like on a clock, from 1 to 12,
if I toss it at 1, I get half the sun
in my eyes or all of it.
But if I toss to the right,
everything’s clear, I can see.
From this side, I’m playing
against the wind.
Playing against a lefty.
But if I toss to the right,
that automatically means
he’ll move to the right side
because from there
I don’t have the angle
to go down the center,
I have to slice,
he reads that serve
and most likely plays crosscourt...
So you have a whole scenario
in your head.
If I do this or that,
or toss here or there...?
You kind of go crazy
from all this info, you know?
But as an individual athlete,
you need that in your head.
At least I do,
maybe others don’t.
I feel I have to predict things
in my head,
and then we’ll see what happens.
As a coach, I’m interested in
form timing.
How can you peak in tennis
without losing results?
You mentioned Olympic sports
earlier and I get that.
Something happens every 2 years
or a few times a year.
But in tennis-like in football-
you must peak each week.
And in football it’s clearer,
in team sports,
team form is the sum
of individual forms.
The more players are in form,
the better the play,
confidence grows.
Then results come, and those
out of form improve too.
You can push someone, rest them,
someone else steps in...
But how do you time your form
when in January it’s Australia,
in May Paris, July Wimbledon,
then September...
And in between, a bunch of
important tournaments.
Well, there are ways-you know,
that’s our sport’s nature.
The schedule’s like that,
you must adapt.
For most of your career,
when you’re young,
every tournament matters.
But these are the big ones,
we know that.
Not everyone sees it that way.
Many say Grand Slams
are the most important.
Slams are their dream. But really,
they don’t live and train
or plan their schedule
to peak for Grand Slams,
to be freshest for those events.
They don’t do it.
Most just don’t.
Why? Because that’s how it is.
Maybe they don’t believe
in themselves enough,
don’t believe they
can go far in a Slam.
So the week before, they try
to get some points elsewhere.
You know, not everyone’s made
to compete at the top,
for the biggest titles,
and that’s okay.
But there are ways.
Federer helped me a lot with that,
not directly, but indirectly.
I watched how he planned
his schedule.
I learned a lot from him
in that sense.
It helped me understand
how to time my form,
when to take a break even
if I didn’t feel like it.
I made mistakes too, didn’t
take breaks when I should’ve,
but most of the time,
I made the right calls
which helped me to win
and do what I’ve done.
So I think you should always
keep an open mind and watch,
because you never know who
you might learn from.
Ivan Ljubičić, for example,
shared coach Riccardo Piatti
with me when I was young,
17, 18 years old.
Ivan helped me,
not just with my game,
but with crucial details,
like what strings to use.
What string pattern, vertical,
horizontal, racquet type...
Back then, I was still thinking
whether to stick
with my racquet or not, synthetic
or natural gut, or mix them.
There are millions
of string combos.
I listened to him-why?
He was #3 in the world,
he knew what he was doing.
And I trusted him.
Like I said, I shared a coach
with him,
we trained and traveled
together a lot.
I’m grateful he was open with me,
that he shared those things,
because he didn’t have to. Really,
he didn’t have to, and most don’t.
We’re competitors, rivals.
You’re young now, but tomorrow
we might fight for the same food.
That’s why you have to be honest,
curious and ask tough questions,
because how else will you know,
if you don’t ask?
I always tried. Now, looking back,
sometimes I feel embarrassed
about how I approached Goran
and gave him a Bonžita bar...
"Who asks, doesn’t stray!"
It’s better to ask and maybe
embarrass yourself than be silent.
At least you’ll get an answer,
even if it’s a simple one.
I’ll ask two more questions...
You’re a citizen of the world.
A proud Serb,
with Montenegrin
and Croatian roots.
Do people from this region
have something special?
If you think so, what is it?
Or are we just imagining it?
I firmly believe we’re special.
-Special for what? -For many things.
Look through history,
many minds came from here.
In science, history, literature,
sports and arts...
We all talk about it,
but it really is true.
Maybe not to the same extent
as China in the IT sector,
in Silicon Valley, but many of ours
have reached great heights
thanks to engineering genes,
like Nikola Tesla’s.
And because of those genes
and adaptability,
thanks to intellect, they’ve succeeded
in that sphere worldwide.
And proportionally, there are many,
given our population size.
Compared to China or other
nations with billions of people.
In that context, I don’t think
it’s a delusion.
It’s not made up.
It really is true.
And I’m proud of that, truly.
That gives us confidence,
so when you go abroad,
you know how to carry yourself.
Thank God, I have lots of life
experience and I’ve met people
from hospitality, real estate,
hotel management…
Our people I’ve met around the world
these past twenty-something years,
who shared stories with me.
They leave with 100 dollars
in their pocket, to America,
and they have to build a life there.
They end up building empires
of restaurants and hotels.
They become multimillionaires.
These are inspiring stories.
However, what’s negative,
probably for all in this region,
and what creates a huge problem,
though I don’t think it’s unfixable,
is the fact that we’re divided.
Until the moment the cup overflows.
When there’s a crisis, we unite.
But why only then?
Why can’t we be more constructive
with each other?
We shouldn’t be fighting at home,
while fighting out in the world
to prove ourselves.
I won’t get into the topic of wars.
Those are wounds.
I get that every side has its story,
its losses, and it’s hard.
And sport is one of the areas,
one of the fields in society,
that sends a message of unity
and normalizing relations.
And it helps heal wounds, yes.
But those who’ve felt it...
You can’t forget that.
And you shouldn’t.
Some people can’t move past it.
I get that, and I respect that.
But let’s at least try,
like neighbors, just a little.
Like in business, let’s help
each other even a little,
toward a more normal
and better life together.
Because Serbia’s closest neighbor
is Croatia, and vice versa.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia…
It can’t be Spain, you get it?
And in that sense, there’s this
bitter taste in my mouth.
Because we’re so divided,
so resentful to each other.
And in the end, we only work
against ourselves.
Not just between nations,
but inside our own too.
I see what we do
to each other in Serbia.
I don’t believe it’s different
in Croatia or elsewhere.
There’s a lot of inner division.
But I still understand it,
because this region has suffered
not just in a hundred years,
but in a thousand,
even two thousand years.
The Ottomans were here...
Conquerors of Europe from Asia
had to pass through here.
We are a very proud people.
And I’m proud we stand our ground,
that we don’t back down.
But all of us would live easier
if we just eased up a little…
If we made life more pleasant
for one another. -That’s true, Novak.
This is a show for children,
and you’re a great humanitarian.
Your wife Jelena runs an organization
that, through sports and workshops,
tries to help children and parents
with advice drawn
from your family’s experience
to help guide them on how to handle
dreams, plans, expectations, all that.
I’ve asked everyone,
so I’ll ask you too.
How do you see the relationship
between talent and hard work
in becoming a top athlete?
Do you want a percentage
or just in general?
How much is talent,
and how much is work?
Of course, you can’t make it
just through talent or just work.
In the past, work was
underrated. -Right.
Now it seems that,
especially in elite sports,
talent is the one being underestimated.
There’s this idea in society that
"everyone can do everything." -True.
But not everyone can do everything.
I don’t mean that negatively,
but why force something,
when maybe you’re meant for
something else? -I completely agree.
Otherwise, we create trauma
and frustration.
People say today that Ronaldo achieved
everything through hard work,
that he has no talent. How can that be?
Of course he has talent.
What’s your view on that balance?
Ivanišević once said about you.
He’s never seen a player who,
after 2–3 months off, comes back on court
and, within minutes, has an incredible
feel for space, the ball, the court, timing,
everything. That’s pure talent. -It is.
I agree with your point.
Right now, society is obsessed
with "work, work, work."
That is essential, in everything,
especially in elite sport,
it’s non-negotiable,
talent must be there...
If work has replaced what used to be talent,
and if talent used to be the main factor,
now it’s work. That’s the core shift.
Talent is a God-given gift.
It appears in childhood
and is shaped as you grow.
One good thing about this region
is kids try different sports.
Croatia and Serbia
are team-sport nations:
basketball, water polo,
volleyball, handball, football.
Tennis doesn’t have the same tradition
or cultural weight here.
In Croatia, maybe a bit more.
But in Serbia, not really.
You grow up trying different sports,
whatever’s available to you.
Everyone has different circumstances.
With the help of parents or a coach,
someone might say:
"This child is meant for this sport,
or this art, he has talent."
He has that spark, that potential.
And you grab hold of that.
There are people with less talent
who made up for it through hard work,
and through dedication,
they reached great heights. That’s real.
But I agree that talent is decisive.
Talent brings beauty
to an athlete’s performance.
That’s why they say Federer is
the embodiment of tennis,
elegance, style, the ease in his game
and movement. It’s true. Perfection.
And on top of that, he’s one of the most
successful players in history,
which makes his career incredible.
Perfection, in that sense.
But talent must be there,
no question.
To what degree, people debate,
offering their own views.
They say Novak is less talented
than Federer.
That doesn’t mean I lack talent.
I clearly do, just less, obviously.
But I have my own kind of talent,
one that works for me,
that gave my game and career
what it needed, like his did for him.
Everyone carries their
own "something" through life.
Thank God our sports
and games are so diverse,
so there’s space for different
kinds of talent.
Bravo, Novak. Thank you
for everything. -Thank you.
I’ve enjoyed this, and I’m sure
our viewers will too. -Thank you again.
Thank you so much.
-Thank you.